Pre vs berkeley (#275)
microbiomedata/berkeley-schema-fy24: pre_vs_berkeley.md

# Merging the Berkeley schema into the NMDC schema

_Corresponding to a jump from major version 10 to 11_

This major refactoring increases the number of **classes** in the schema from 70 to 75, but decreases the number of root

> classes from 19 to 17 due to better organization.

Reviewer: When I first read this sentence, I wondered what a "root class" was. @turbomam explained to me via Zoom that it is a class that is not `is_a` anything.

> | Removed legacy class                | New/Replacement class from Berkeley schema | Selected legacy parents   |

Reviewer: When I saw this table, I wondered "what is this?" I suggest adding a sentence above the table, saying "Here's a table of..."

|-------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------|

> | Activity                            |                                            |                           |

Reviewer: I can read these OK (no issues). I noticed occurrences of these strings below the table are formatted `list this` (with backticks), whereas they are not formatted that way in this table. I don't know whether adding backticks here would make it more or less difficult for readers to grok.

Author: no, we do not want to add backticks here. that would break the pretty table rendering

Reviewer: I think GitHub renders inline backtick-ed strings within tables OK; e.g.:

| A | B |
|--|--|
| bare | bare |
| `wrapped` | `wrapped` |
| bare | bare |
| `wrapped` | `wrapped` |
| bare | bare |
| `wrapped` | `wrapped` |

|                                     | Instrument                                 |                           |
|                                     | MassSpectrometry                           |                           |
|                                     | MassSpectrometryConfiguration              |                           |
|                                     | MaterialProcessing                         |                           |
|                                     | MobilePhaseSegment                         |                           |
|                                     | NucleotideSequencing                       |                           |
|                                     | PortionOfSubstance                         |                           |
|                                     | ProtocolExecution                          |                           |
|                                     | StorageProcess                             |                           |
|                                     | WorkflowExecution                          |                           |

> For example, `MetagenomeAnnotationActivity` used to be located in the hierarchy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the `MetagenomeAnnotationActivity` class used to be located in the hierarchy
```

> `Activity.WorkFlowExecutionActivity`, but now it and 11 similar classes are located in

Reviewer: I'm not familiar with this notation. Is `WorkflowExecutionActivity` an attribute of `Activity`? It reminds me of `instance.attribute` notation.

Author: I like this but want to discuss with others. I'm adding a "Conventions" line explaining this notation for now.

`NamedThing.PlannedProcess.WorkflowExecution`. The word `Activity`, inherited from the Provenance Ontology, has largely
been removed from the schema, as `PlannedProcess` from the Ontology of Biomedical Investigations now plays a more
important organizational role.

## v10.9.1

![Activity.png](Activity.png)

`ProtocolExecution` has been added as a `PlannedProcess` for aggregating other processes together when they follow the

> same `Protocol`.

Reviewer: At this point, I found myself wondering "are these formatted words all names of classes?"

Author: in any documentation I write, backticks indicate the verbatim name of an element in the schema or a variable, function, etc in Python code

Author: Added comment to Conventions section at top of document

Reviewer: OK. Even with that info, I am wondering whether these are names of _classes_ (verbatim from the schema) or names of _some other kind of thing_ (verbatim from the schema).

Author: I have added more section headers, more conventions definitions, and more careful use of backticks

![ProtocolExecution.png](ProtocolExecution.png)

Several other kinds of processual classes were also migrated into the `NamedThing.PlannedProcess`, with or without
renaming or other refactoring. For example, the fairly vague root class `OmicsProcessing` is now
`NamedThing.PlannedProcess.DataGeneration`, which now has the following subclasses:

- `MassSpectrometry`
- `NucleotideSequencing`

> The leagcy `BiosampleProcessing` class (including `Pooling`, `LibraryPreparation`) and some classes that were previously

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The legacy `BiosampleProcessing` class (including `Pooling`, `LibraryPreparation`) and some classes that were previously
```

direct subclasses of `PlannedProcess` (`Extraction`, `SubSamplingProcess`, `MixingProcess`, `FiltrationProcess`,

> `ChromatographicSeparationProcess`) have been re-rooted into a new `MaterialProcessing` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ChromatographicSeparationProcess`) now descend from a new class, named `MaterialProcessing`.
```

Author: I don;t think either of the wordings we are using are really defined in the LinkML specs or in the nmdc-schema

> `DissolvingProcess` and `ChemicalConversionProcess` are new subclasses of `MaterialProcessing` as of v11.

Reviewer: I'm wondering whether the "v11" is implicit (I think all these statements are about things that changed between the legacy schema and the Berkeley schema).

## v11.0.1

![MaterialProcessing.png](MaterialProcessing.png)

`StorageProcess` has been added as a new  `PlannedProcess` but is not considered `MaterialProcessing` because it does

> not intrinsically create new/modified samples.

Reviewer: "not considered ..."

I'm wondering whether that means:
- The schema says it is not a `MaterialProcessing`; or
- Team members do not think of it as a `MaterialProcessing`

Author: switched to "...but the schema does not classify it as a..."

Terms that implied quantification like `MetaboliteQuantification` have been renamed to reemphasize the more fundamental
activity of identifying, thus `MetaboliteIdentification`

> A `CalibrationInformation` class and two `Configuration` classes have been added in support of chromatographic

Reviewer: > two `Configuration` classes

Is this referring to two classes, each of whose name was `Configuration`? Or is it referring to two classes that inherited from a class named `Configuration`? Or is it referring to classes whose names end with "...`Configuration`"? Etc.

separations and mass spectrometry analyses. These are subclasses of the new `InformationObject`, which has also become
the parent of `DataObject`, which used to be a direct subclass of `NamedThing`.

## v11.0.1

![InformationObject.png](InformationObject.png)

## v11.0.1

![Configuration.png](Configuration.png)

Solution-centric modelling for laboratory processes was also replaced with substance-centric modelling

> ### Removed:

Reviewer: When I read this, I found myself wondering, "what are these things? Classes?"
